Stasiun Lempuyangan Yogyakarta
Inggris
Lempuyangan Station (LPN) is a railway station located in Bausasran, Danurejan, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. It is 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) east of Yogyakarta Station, 114 metres (374 ft) above sea level. The station is part of Operational Area VI Yogyakarta. It has 11 lines, including two straight tracks.

Opened on 2 March 1872, Lempuyangan Station is used for passengers and local freight. The station has signage with travel information: train capacity and route details, such as the distance between stations. A screen displays train arrivals and departures, similar to an airport.

Lempuyangan Station was inaugurated on 2 March 1872 by the Dutch East Indies private railway company, Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg Maatschappij (NIS) as the end point of the Semarang–Solo–Yogyakarta cross-rail line and is the first and oldest train station in Yogyakarta. The construction of this station was motivated by the policy of transporting sugar by using the railroad mode of transportation—in the 1870s many sugar industries had sprung up in Yogyakarta, which were entirely managed by the Dutch. The presence of this station contributed to the development of the people of Yogyakarta at that time.

This station has long been used as the departure station for economy class trains from Yogyakarta, in contrast to other stations in Java which generally serve economy series stops after the policy of separating station services for economy and non-economy train passengers. When all other economy trains were still departing from Yogyakarta Tugu Station, this station was already the terminal station for the Empu Jaya train bound for Jakarta Pasar Senen (now Progo) and the Argopuro train bound for Banyuwangi (now Sri Tanjung).

Lempuyangan Station has eleven train lines. Initially, only line 4 was a straight line. After the construction of the Surakarta–Yogyakarta double track section was completed on 8 January 2007, line 3 was also used as a straight line. To the north of line 5, there is a rail that goes to the Yogyakarta Warehousing and Logistics Center (PKLG/Supply Warehouse) (formerly the NIS roundhouse) and Yogyakarta railway workshop which is the largest train repair shop on the island of Java. This station has been equipped with signposts to go to certain rooms/track numbers/facilities, track directions accompanied by distance traveled, and screens to monitor train departures and arrivals in real time.

In 2009, the station underwent overall repairs by adding a new building which is located to the east of the old building.

In mid-2017, the station area underwent another renovation. The An-Nuur Mosque, which is located west of the station building, was finally opened to the general public, while the prayer room located to the east is only used for passengers who have boarded or have not yet left. Expansion was also carried out in the parking lot and the elongation of the station canopy roof. In 2018–2019, the An-Nuur Mosque was demolished to accommodate other facilities. Since March 2020, the vacant land located on the west side of Lempuyangan Station has been developed into a RailExpress warehouse (now KAI Logistik Ekspres).

Regarding the project to upgrade the train's electrical signaling system at this station, a new electrical signaling system produced by Len Industri as of April 2021 has been installed which will replace the old electrical signaling system produced by Siemens. This signaling has been active since September 2021. At the same time, the rail line between this station and Lempuyangan Station is used as a double single-track or twin rail.