Yogyakarta Railway Station
Inggris
Yogyakarta Station (Indonesian: Stasiun Yogyakarta, Javanese: ꦱ꧀ꦠꦱꦶꦪꦸꦤ꧀​ꦪꦺꦴꦒꦾꦏꦂꦠ), commonly known as Tugu Station (abbreviation YK, number 3020) is a railway station located in Yogyakarta, Special Region of Yogyakarta, in Indonesia. The altitude of this station is +113 m (371 ft) amsl.

It is the biggest and most important station in Yogyakarta, located in the heart of the city. This station is adjacent to Jalan Malioboro. The city's other most important station is Lempuyangan railway station.

Staatsspoorwegen (SS) was built the railway line from Cilacap towards Yogyakarta as a part of developing Javanese southern line. This station was opened along with opening of the line on 20 July 1887.

A unique fact about this station is, the southern platform was owned by the first company of Javanese railway system, the Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg Maatschappij (NIS) with 1,435-millimetre (56.5 in) gauge. The northern part was owned by Staatsspoorwegen (SS) with 1,067-millimetre (42.0 in) gauge. There are two currently abandoned tracks that branched from this station, to Bantul (Palbapang) and Magelang (Secang).

To the west of this station there were two branch lines which have all been deactivated, namely the route to Magelang–Parakan and to Palbapang, Bantul. The route to Magelang was decommissioned between 1972 and 1976 due to the eruption of Mount Merapi, but traces of this route can still be seen in several places on Jalan Darat Pelajar, Yogyakarta. The line also has a branch at Secang to the Ambarawa Railway Museum via Tuntang until it ends at Kedungjati which has also been decommissioned. Apart from that, the route to Palbapang was decommissioned in the 1973–1980s, but traces of this route can still be seen in several places, one of which is in the parking lot on the northwest side of the Kraton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat.

This station is designated as a cultural heritage by the Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta.

It is currently operated by Kereta Api Indonesia, Regional VI Operation Area of Yogyakarta. This station and its railway tracks stretching from west to east and also as the border of Jetis and Gedongtengen district.

This station serves the departure and arrival of all commercial classes (executive, business, and non-subsidized economy class) train from Jakarta, Bandung, and Surabaya.