Yogyakarta State University
Inggris
State University of Yogyakarta (Indonesian: Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta, abbreviated as UNY) is a state university established in the Special Region of Yogyakarta, Indonesia in 1964.

State University of Yogyakarta (formerly IKIP Yogyakarta or Yogyakarta Institute of Teacher Education and Educational Sciences) was founded on May 21, 1964. IKIP Yogyakarta was a merger of two educational institutions: the Faculty of Pedagogy of Gadjah Mada University and the Institute of Teacher Education. They offered study programs of education sciences and teacher education. The merger was mandated by the Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia, Number I/1963.

On August 4, 1999, the President of the Republic of Indonesia, by Presidential Decree No. 93/1999, officially declared that IKIP Yogyakarta was converted into the State University of Yogyakarta (abbreviated as SUY). It expanded the institution's mandate to offer other programs. The conversion of IKIP Yogyakarta from a specialized training institution into a comprehensive university was based on some considerations. One of them is the observation that the organizational structure of an educational institution was insufficient to support scientific development and that the number of graduates of IKIP Yogyakarta who entered non-teaching fields also increased. In carrying out the wider mandate, SUY initially offered 12 non-education study programs at the bachelor level and three-year undergraduate diploma levels in the following faculties: the Faculty of Languages and Arts Education, the Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences Education, and the Faculty of Engineering and Vocational Education. The non-education study programs include those offered in the Faculty of Sport Sciences and the Faculty of Economics.

To meet societal demands, in 2011 the Faculty of Social Sciences and Economics was divided into two separate faculties: the Faculty of Social Sciences and the Faculty of Economics. This was mandated through the Ministerial Decree No. 23/2011 about the Organization and Governance of SUY signed on 22 June 2011. SUY then has seven faculties.

As has been mentioned above, IKIP Yogyakarta was converted into SUY on August 4, 1999. However, the anniversary of IKIP Yogyakarta remains SUY's anniversary, i.e., May 21.