Islamic University of Indonesia
Inggris
Islamic University of Indonesia (Universitas Islam Indonesia, abbreviated as UII) is a national private university in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. It was established on 27 Rajab 1364 (Islamic calendar) or on 8 July 1945 as Islamic Higher School (Sekolah Tinggi Islam or STI) by political figures of the day including Dr. Mohammad Hatta, Mohammad Natsir, Mohammad Roem, Wahid Hasyim, and Abdul Kahar Muzakir. STI developed into a university called Universitas Islam Indonesia on 14 December 1947. Historically, UII is the first private university in Indonesia established after Indonesian independence and considered by some as the oldest private university in the country, although Jakarta Theological Seminary actually precedes it in 1934.

The university seat is in Sleman, Special Region of Yogyakarta, and has a number of campuses within Yogyakarta city.

In 1945, a general assembly meeting of the Masjoemi (Majelis Sjoero Moeslimin Indonesia) was held. The meeting was attended by political figures including Dr. Muhammad Hatta (the first vice president of Indonesia), Mohammad Natsir, Mohammad Roem, and Wachid Hasyim. One of the decisions of this meeting was the establishment of Sekolah Tinggi Islam (STI-Islamic Higher School). STI began operating on July 28, 1945 and developed into a university called Universitas Islam Indonesia (UII) on November 3, 1947.

UII had faculties of Religion, Law, Education, and Economics, which began operations in June 1948. About seven months later, UII was forced to close due to the Dutch military invasion. Many students and staff members joined the Indonesian military force to repel the invasion. In the early 1950s, shortly after the war, UII had to move its classes around the city of Yogyakarta, even using part of the Sultan's Palace and some of the faculty members' houses as classrooms.

UII saw much improvement between 1961 and 1970 under the leadership of Prof. R.H.A. Kasmat Bahuwinangun (1960–1963) and Prof. Dr. Dr. Sardjito (1964–1970). During his term in office, Bahuwinangun helped develop UII's Faculty of Islamic Studies and Faculty of Tarbiyah as well as expanding to Purwokerto to establish the Faculty of Law and Syari'ah.

From 1964 to 1970, under the leadership of Dr. Sardjito (a leading medical doctor), UII expanded to encompass 22 faculties: five were in Yogyakarta. The rest were in three provinces: Central Java (Solo, Klaten, and Purwokerto); and West and North Sulawesi (Gorontalo). The areas of study offered were Economics, Law, Islamic Law (Syari'ah), Islamic Education (Tarbiyah), Engineering, Medicine, Veterinary Medicine, and Pharmacy. However, when government regulations prevented UII from maintaining educational activities outside Yogyakarta, UII had to close its branch campuses. Some of them became associated with local institutions, including the Faculty of Medicine, which was closed in 1975.

In the early 1970s to 1982, UII saw extensive physical development of its offices and faculty buildings, beginning with the current central office on busy Cik di Tiro Street. This construction was followed by the development of three other campuses throughout the city. During this period, several of UII's faculties acquired accreditation and initiated collaboration with national and international entities, including Gadjah Mada University, King Abdul Azis University of Saudi Arabia, and The Asia Foundation.

Since the beginning of the 1990s, UII has been developing an integrated campus in Sleman regency, in the northern part of the province of Yogyakarta. Most of UII's faculties and buildings will eventually be on these 25 hectares of land.